.. _choosing-editor:

##################
Choosing an editor
##################

Being efficient means being able to use your tools well.  If you are fluent in
using your editor, you will be able think better.  You will do better work
more quickly and you will make fewer mistakes.

This is particularly so for a text file editor.  Bear in mind that you will
likely spend many hundreds of hours using this editor for various parts of
your work over the rest of your career.  Be careful with your choice, and
consider investing time to learn an editor well.

If you do learn your text editor well, you will find yourself using it for
many different tasks, including editing code, documents and configuration
files.

Programmers are a strange bunch of people who are extremely intolerant of
tools that waste their time or energy.  Take their impatience seriously when
you consider choosing your editor.  No programmer would use Windows Notepad
for writing code, and that is for a very good reason.

The two most well-known and fully-featured cross-platform general text editors
are emacs_ and vim_ / gvim_.  These run on any platform.

No doubt you want to know what your instructors use?  No?  Well, in any case,
the answer is that Matthew and JB use vim, and St√©fan uses emacs.

***
vim
***

Vim is based on a classic Unix editor called vi_.  To quote from the `about
vim`_ page:

    Vim isn't an editor designed to hold its users' hands. It is a tool, the
    use of which must be learned.

To use Vim well, you have to practice using its commands, by following any one
of several online tutorials. For example, you might try the `openvim tutorial
<http://www.openvim.com/tutorial.html>`_.  The trick is to teach your fingers
what to do so you don't think about it any more. This takes a long time,
budget a week of 30 minutes a day to start to feel comfortable.

If you do invest this effort, vim is an immensely satisfying editor to use,
because you quickly find that your fingers remember what to do.  A
programmer's joke about vim is that "the cursor follows your eyes", because
your fingers are moving the cursor around the text without any apparent
thought or effort on your part.

It is relatively complicated to configure vim to its full potential.  Please
ask for help if you are interested to do this.  It is time well spent.

*****
Emacs
*****

Emacs is a classic and highly configurable text editor originally written by
the great `Richard Stallman`_.  It is quicker to learn than vim, probably
harder to configure, and has great power.  A good place to start is the `emacs
tour`_.  About an hour of research and practice gets you far enough to learn
how to start learning emacs.

As for vim, to use it well, it needs some practice to get used to the
keystrokes used, and as for vim, this practice is amply repaid by very fluent
movement and editing.

Emacs hard to configure, largely because it is so powerful.  We are very happy
to help with this if you are interested.

*************************************
Other editors that you might consider
*************************************

We will support these editors too for anyone who wants to use them.  If you
prefer another editor, we will help as best we can.

This suggested set of editors comes from the top four editors from  `text
editor competition`_ with the addition of TextMate (because we know at least
one extremely efficient coder who uses it).

For any platform
================

Some people really like `Sublime text`_.  It is free to try, and the trial
version does not expire, but if you continue to use it, the authors ask you to
buy a license for 70 USD.

For OSX
=======

`textmate`_ has some very serious enthusiasts among people who know what they
are doing on OSX. There's a free `textmate download for UC Berkeley`_.

For Windows
===========

`Notepad++`_ seems to be a Windows favorite.

************
Suggestions?
************

If you have any other suggestions or recommendations, please let us know.

.. include:: links_names.inc
