intro_to_4d.rst, before:

#########################################################
Working with four dimensional images, masks and functions
#########################################################

.. nbplot::
    :include-source: false

    >>> # Compatibility with Python 2
    >>> from __future__ import print_function
    >>> from __future__ import division  # 1/2 == 0.5, not 0

.. nbplot::

    >>> #: Our usual imports
    >>> import numpy as np  # the Python array package
    >>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt  # the Python plotting package

******************
Reading text files
******************

We've been reading values from text files in the exercises.

Here is some revision on how to do that, going from the crude to the
elegant way.

I first write a little text file out to disk:

.. nbplot::

    >>> numbers = [1.2, 2.3, 3.4, 4.5]
    >>> fobj = open('some_numbers.txt', 'wt')
    >>> for number in numbers:
    ...     # String version of number, plus end-of-line character
    ...     fobj.write(str(number) + '\n')
    4
    4
    4
    4
    >>> fobj.close()

Now I read it back again. First, I will read the all the lines in one shot,
returning a list of strings:

.. nbplot::

    >>> fobj = open('some_numbers.txt', 'rt')
    >>> lines = fobj.readlines()
    >>> len(lines)
    4

.. nbplot::

    >>> lines[0]
    '1.2\n'

Next I will read the file, but converting each number to a float:

.. nbplot::

    >>> fobj = open('some_numbers.txt', 'rt')
    >>> numbers_again = []
    >>> for line in fobj.readlines():
    ...     numbers_again.append(float(line))
    >>> numbers_again
    [1.2, 2.3, 3.4, 4.5]

In fact we can do this even more simply by using ``np.loadtxt``:

.. nbplot::

    >>> np.loadtxt('some_numbers.txt')
    array([ 1.2,  2.3,  3.4,  4.5])

*************************
Loading data with nibabel
*************************

Nibabel allows us to ``load`` images. First we need to ``import`` the nibabel
library:

.. nbplot::

    >>> import nibabel as nib

First I ``load`` the image, to give me an "image" object:

.. nbplot::

    >>> img = nib.load('ds114_sub009_t2r1.nii')
    >>> type(img)
    <class 'nibabel.nifti1.Nifti1Image'>

You can explore the image object with ``img.`` followed by TAB at the IPython
prompt.

Because images can have large arrays, nibabel does not load the image array
when you ``load`` the image, in order to save time and memory. The best way to
get the image array data is with the ``get_data()`` method.

.. nbplot::

    >>> data = img.get_data()
    >>> type(data)
    <class 'numpy.core.memmap.memmap'>

The ``memmap`` is a special type of array that saves memory, but otherwise
behaves the same as any other numpy array.

I recommend you disable the use of the 'memmap' special arrays by using the
``mmap`` *keyword argument* when you load the image.

.. nbplot::

    >>> img = nib.load('ds114_sub009_t2r1.nii', mmap=False)

In this case you will get a normal array from ``get_data``

.. nbplot::

    >>> data = img.get_data()
    >>> type(data)
    <class 'numpy.ndarray'>

**************************************
Four dimensional arrays - space + time
**************************************

The image we have just loaded is a four-dimensional image, with a
four-dimensional array:

.. nbplot::

    >>> data.shape
    (64, 64, 30, 173)

The first three axes represent three dimensional space. The last axis
represents time. Here the last (time) axis has length 173. This means
that, for each of these 173 elements, there is one whole three
dimensional image. We often call the three-dimensional images *volumes*.
So we could say that this 4D image contains 173 volumes.

We have previously been taking slices over the third axis of a
three-dimensional image. We can now take slices over the fourth axis of this
four-dimensional image:

.. nbplot::

    >>> # A slice over the final (time) axis
    >>> first_vol = data[:, :, :, 0]

This slice selects the first three-dimensional volume (3D image) from the 4D
array:

.. nbplot::

    >>> first_vol.shape
    (64, 64, 30)

You can use the ellipsis ``...`` when slicing an array. The ellipsis is a
short cut for "everything on the previous axes". For example, these two have
exactly the same meaning:

.. nbplot::

    >>> first_vol = data[:, :, :, 0]
    >>> first_vol_again = data[..., 0]  # Using the ellipsis

``first_vol`` is a 3D image just like the 3D images you have already seen:

.. nbplot::

    >>> # A slice over the third dimension
    >>> plt.imshow(first_vol[:, :, 14], cmap='gray')
    <...>

***************************************************
Numpy operations work on the whole array by default
***************************************************

Numpy operatons like ``min``, and ``max`` and ``std`` operate on the whole
numpy array by default, ignoring any array shape. For example, here is the
maximum value for the whole 4D array:

.. nbplot::

    >>> np.max(data)
    6793

This is exactly the same as:

.. nbplot::

    >>> # maximum when flattening the array to 1 dimension
    >>> np.max(data.ravel())
    6793

You can ask numpy to operate over particular axes instead of operating over
the whole array. For example, this will generate a 3D image, where each array
value is the variance over the 173 values at that 3D position (the variance
across time):

.. nbplot::

    >>> # variance across the final (time) axis
    >>> var_vol = np.var(data, axis=3)
    >>> plt.imshow(var_vol[:, :, 14], cmap='gray')
    <...>

****************************
Indexing with boolean arrays
****************************

See the scipy lectures notes on the `numpy array object`_.

Let's say we have an array like this:

.. nbplot::

    >>> arr = np.array([[0, 1, 3, 0], [5, 2, 0, 1]])
    >>> arr
    array([[0, 1, 3, 0],
           [5, 2, 0, 1]])

We can get a True / False (boolean) array to tell us whether these values are
above some threshold:

.. nbplot::

    >>> tf_array = arr > 2
    >>> tf_array
    array([[False, False,  True, False],
           [ True, False, False, False]], dtype=bool)

We can use this boolean array to *index* into the original array (or any array
with a suitable shape). This will select only the elements where the boolean
array is ``True``. The returned array may well have selected only a few
members from any particular row or column or (in general) higher axis, so if
the mask has the same number of dimensions as the array being indexed, the
returned array is always one-dimensional to reflect the loss of shape:

.. nbplot::

    >>> selected_elements = arr[tf_array]
    >>> selected_elements
    array([3, 5])
    >>> selected_elements.shape
    (2,)

We can use this to select values in our image as well. For example, if we
wanted to select only values less than 10 in ``first_vol``:

.. nbplot::

    >>> tf_lt_10 = first_vol < 10
    >>> vals_lt_10 = first_vol[tf_lt_10]
    >>> np.unique(vals_lt_10)
    array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9], dtype=int16)

******************
Defining functions
******************

See :doc:`brisk_python`.

A function takes input arguments, transforms them, and returns the
output. For example, the following function adds two numbers:

.. nbplot::

    >>> def add(a, b):
    ...     return a + b

Functions can also return multiple values, for example:

.. nbplot::

    >>> def weather():
    ...     return 'hot', 'north-east', 78
    ...
    >>> sun, wind, temp = weather()
    >>>
    >>> print('Sun:', sun)
    Sun: hot
    >>> print('Window:', wind)
    Window: north-east
    >>> print('Temperature:', temp)
    Temperature: 78

Commit message:

Add download link to image for exercise.

intro_to_4d.rst, after:

#########################################################
Working with four dimensional images, masks and functions
#########################################################

.. nbplot::
    :include-source: false

    >>> # Compatibility with Python 2
    >>> from __future__ import print_function
    >>> from __future__ import division  # 1/2 == 0.5, not 0

.. nbplot::

    >>> #: Our usual imports
    >>> import numpy as np  # the Python array package
    >>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt  # the Python plotting package

******************
Reading text files
******************

We've been reading values from text files in the exercises.

Here is some revision on how to do that, going from the crude to the
elegant way.

I first write a little text file out to disk:

.. nbplot::

    >>> numbers = [1.2, 2.3, 3.4, 4.5]
    >>> fobj = open('some_numbers.txt', 'wt')
    >>> for number in numbers:
    ...     # String version of number, plus end-of-line character
    ...     fobj.write(str(number) + '\n')
    4
    4
    4
    4
    >>> fobj.close()

Now I read it back again. First, I will read the all the lines in one shot,
returning a list of strings:

.. nbplot::

    >>> fobj = open('some_numbers.txt', 'rt')
    >>> lines = fobj.readlines()
    >>> len(lines)
    4

.. nbplot::

    >>> lines[0]
    '1.2\n'

Next I will read the file, but converting each number to a float:

.. nbplot::

    >>> fobj = open('some_numbers.txt', 'rt')
    >>> numbers_again = []
    >>> for line in fobj.readlines():
    ...     numbers_again.append(float(line))
    >>> numbers_again
    [1.2, 2.3, 3.4, 4.5]

In fact we can do this even more simply by using ``np.loadtxt``:

.. nbplot::

    >>> np.loadtxt('some_numbers.txt')
    array([ 1.2,  2.3,  3.4,  4.5])

*************************
Loading data with nibabel
*************************

Nibabel allows us to ``load`` images. First we need to ``import`` the nibabel
library:

.. nbplot::

    >>> import nibabel as nib

I am going to load the image with filename :download:`ds114_sub009_t2r1.nii`.
Download the file from the link to type along.

First I ``load`` the image, to give me an "image" object:

.. nbplot::

    >>> img = nib.load('ds114_sub009_t2r1.nii')
    >>> type(img)
    <class 'nibabel.nifti1.Nifti1Image'>

You can explore the image object with ``img.`` followed by TAB at the IPython
prompt.

Because images can have large arrays, nibabel does not load the image array
when you ``load`` the image, in order to save time and memory. The best way to
get the image array data is with the ``get_data()`` method.

.. nbplot::

    >>> data = img.get_data()
    >>> type(data)
    <class 'numpy.core.memmap.memmap'>

The ``memmap`` is a special type of array that saves memory, but otherwise
behaves the same as any other numpy array.

I recommend you disable the use of the 'memmap' special arrays by using the
``mmap`` *keyword argument* when you load the image.

.. nbplot::

    >>> img = nib.load('ds114_sub009_t2r1.nii', mmap=False)

In this case you will get a normal array from ``get_data``

.. nbplot::

    >>> data = img.get_data()
    >>> type(data)
    <class 'numpy.ndarray'>

**************************************
Four dimensional arrays - space + time
**************************************

The image we have just loaded is a four-dimensional image, with a
four-dimensional array:

.. nbplot::

    >>> data.shape
    (64, 64, 30, 173)

The first three axes represent three dimensional space. The last axis
represents time. Here the last (time) axis has length 173. This means
that, for each of these 173 elements, there is one whole three
dimensional image. We often call the three-dimensional images *volumes*.
So we could say that this 4D image contains 173 volumes.

We have previously been taking slices over the third axis of a
three-dimensional image. We can now take slices over the fourth axis of this
four-dimensional image:

.. nbplot::

    >>> # A slice over the final (time) axis
    >>> first_vol = data[:, :, :, 0]

This slice selects the first three-dimensional volume (3D image) from the 4D
array:

.. nbplot::

    >>> first_vol.shape
    (64, 64, 30)

You can use the ellipsis ``...`` when slicing an array. The ellipsis is a
short cut for "everything on the previous axes". For example, these two have
exactly the same meaning:

.. nbplot::

    >>> first_vol = data[:, :, :, 0]
    >>> first_vol_again = data[..., 0]  # Using the ellipsis

``first_vol`` is a 3D image just like the 3D images you have already seen:

.. nbplot::

    >>> # A slice over the third dimension
    >>> plt.imshow(first_vol[:, :, 14], cmap='gray')
    <...>

***************************************************
Numpy operations work on the whole array by default
***************************************************

Numpy operatons like ``min``, and ``max`` and ``std`` operate on the whole
numpy array by default, ignoring any array shape. For example, here is the
maximum value for the whole 4D array:

.. nbplot::

    >>> np.max(data)
    6793

This is exactly the same as:

.. nbplot::

    >>> # maximum when flattening the array to 1 dimension
    >>> np.max(data.ravel())
    6793

You can ask numpy to operate over particular axes instead of operating over
the whole array. For example, this will generate a 3D image, where each array
value is the variance over the 173 values at that 3D position (the variance
across time):

.. nbplot::

    >>> # variance across the final (time) axis
    >>> var_vol = np.var(data, axis=3)
    >>> plt.imshow(var_vol[:, :, 14], cmap='gray')
    <...>

****************************
Indexing with boolean arrays
****************************

See the scipy lectures notes on the `numpy array object`_.

Let's say we have an array like this:

.. nbplot::

    >>> arr = np.array([[0, 1, 3, 0], [5, 2, 0, 1]])
    >>> arr
    array([[0, 1, 3, 0],
           [5, 2, 0, 1]])

We can get a True / False (boolean) array to tell us whether these values are
above some threshold:

.. nbplot::

    >>> tf_array = arr > 2
    >>> tf_array
    array([[False, False,  True, False],
           [ True, False, False, False]], dtype=bool)

We can use this boolean array to *index* into the original array (or any array
with a suitable shape). This will select only the elements where the boolean
array is ``True``. The returned array may well have selected only a few
members from any particular row or column or (in general) higher axis, so if
the mask has the same number of dimensions as the array being indexed, the
returned array is always one-dimensional to reflect the loss of shape:

.. nbplot::

    >>> selected_elements = arr[tf_array]
    >>> selected_elements
    array([3, 5])
    >>> selected_elements.shape
    (2,)

We can use this to select values in our image as well. For example, if we
wanted to select only values less than 10 in ``first_vol``:

.. nbplot::

    >>> tf_lt_10 = first_vol < 10
    >>> vals_lt_10 = first_vol[tf_lt_10]
    >>> np.unique(vals_lt_10)
    array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9], dtype=int16)

******************
Defining functions
******************

See :doc:`brisk_python`.

A function takes input arguments, transforms them, and returns the
output. For example, the following function adds two numbers:

.. nbplot::

    >>> def add(a, b):
    ...     return a + b

Functions can also return multiple values, for example:

.. nbplot::

    >>> def weather():
    ...     return 'hot', 'north-east', 78
    ...
    >>> sun, wind, temp = weather()
    >>>
    >>> print('Sun:', sun)
    Sun: hot
    >>> print('Window:', wind)
    Window: north-east
    >>> print('Temperature:', temp)
    Temperature: 78
