mean_test_example.rst, before:

############################################
A worked example of the general linear model
############################################

See: `introduction to the general linear model`_.

Here we go through the matrix formulation of the general linear model with the
simplest possible example |--| a t-test for the difference of the sample mean
from zero.

Let us say we have the hypothesis that men are more psychopathic than women.

We find 10 male-female couples, and we give them each a psychopathy
questionnaire.  We score the questionnaires, and then, for each couple, we
subtract the woman's score from the man's score, to get a difference score.

We have 10 difference scores:

.. nbplot::

    >>> #: Our standard imports
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> import numpy.linalg as npl
    >>> # Only show 4 decimals when printing arrays
    >>> np.set_printoptions(precision=4)

.. nbplot::

    >>> differences = np.array([ 1.5993, -0.13  ,  2.3806,  1.3761, -1.3595,
    ...                          1.0286,  0.8466,  1.6669, -0.8241,  0.4469])

Our hypothesis is that the females in the couple have a lower psychopathy
score. We therefore predict that, in the whole population of male-female
couples, the difference measure will, on average, be positive (men have higher
scores than women).

We teat this hypothesis by testing whether the sample mean is far enough from
zero to make it unlikely that the population mean is actually zero.

******************************
The standard error of the mean
******************************

One way to test this, is to compare the mean value, to the `standard error of
the mean
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_error#Standard_error_of_the_mean_2>`_.

The `standard error`_ of a statistic (such as a mean) is the standard
deviation of the sampling distribution of the statistic.  The standard
deviation of the sampling distribution is the estimate of the standard
deviation of the statistic, when taking a very large number of samples of the
statistic.

As usual, define the *mean* of a vector of values $\vec{x}$ as:

.. math::

    \bar{x} = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^n x_i

Define the *unviased estimate of the standard deviation* of $\vec{x}$ as:

.. math::

    s_x = \sqrt{\frac{1}{n-1} \sum_{i=1}^n (x_i - \bar{x})^2}

Notice the $\frac{1}{n-1}$.   We have previously used $n$ rather than $n-1$ as
the divisor for the *sample stadnard deviation*.  Using $n$, our *sample
standard deviation* is a biased estimate of the population standard deviation.
Using $n-1$ as the divisor gives an unbiased estimate for population standard
deviation.

The standard error of the mean is:

.. math::

    SE_{\bar{x}} = \frac{s_x}{\sqrt{n}}

where $n$ is the number of samples, 10 in our case.

A t statistic is given by a value divided by the *standard error* of that
value.  The t statistic for $\bar{x}$ is:

.. math::

    t = \frac{\bar{x}}{SE_{\bar{x}}}

In our case:

.. nbplot::

    >>> x = differences
    >>> n = len(x)
    >>> x_bar = np.mean(x)
    >>> x_bar
    0.70314...
    >>> unviased_var_x = 1. / (n - 1) * np.sum((x - x_bar) ** 2)
    >>> s_x = np.sqrt(unviased_var_x)
    >>> s_x
    1.17718...
    >>> SEM = s_x / np.sqrt(n)
    >>> SEM
    0.37225...
    >>> t = x_bar / SEM
    >>> t
    1.88884...

**************************************
Testing using the general linear model
**************************************

It is overkill for us to use the general linear model for this, but it does
show how the machinery works in the simplest case.

:math:`\newcommand{Xmat}{\boldsymbol X} \newcommand{\bvec}{\vec{\beta}}`
:math:`\newcommand{\yvec}{\vec{y}} \newcommand{\xvec}{\vec{x}} \newcommand{\evec}{\vec{\varepsilon}}`

The matrix expression of the general linear model is:

.. math::

   \yvec = \Xmat \bvec + \evec

:math:`\newcommand{Xmat}{\boldsymbol X} \newcommand{\bvec}{\vec{\beta}}`

Define our design matrix $\Xmat$ to have a single column of ones:

.. nbplot::

    >>> X = np.ones((n, 1))
    >>> X
    array([[ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.]])

:math:`\newcommand{\bhat}{\hat{\bvec}} \newcommand{\yhat}{\hat{\yvec}}`

$\bhat$ is The least squares estimate for $\bvec$, and is given by:

.. math::

    \bhat = (\Xmat^T \Xmat)^{-1} \Xmat^T \yvec

Because $\Xmat$ is just a column of ones, $\Xmat^T \yvec = \sum_i{y_i}$.

$\Xmat^T \Xmat = n$, so $(\Xmat^T \Xmat)^{-1} = \frac{1}{n}$.

Thus:

.. math::

    \bhat = (\Xmat^T \Xmat)^{-1} \Xmat^T \yvec \\
    = \frac{1}{n} \sum_i{y_i} \\
    = \bar{y}

The student's t statistic from the general linear model is:

.. math::

   t = \frac{c^T \hat\beta}{\sqrt{\hat{\sigma}^2 c^T (\Xmat^T \Xmat)^+ c}}

where $\hat{\sigma}^2$ is our estimate of variance in the residuals, $c$ is a
contrast vector to select some combination of the design columns, and
$(\Xmat^T \Xmat)^+$ is the *pseudoinverse* of $\Xmat^T \Xmat$.

In our case we have only one design column, so $c = [1]$ and we can omit it.
$\hat{\sigma}^2 = s_x^2$ for $s_x$ defined above.  $\Xmat^T \Xmat$ is
invertible, and we know the inverse already: $\frac{1}{n}$.  Therefore:

.. math::

   t = \frac{\bar{y}}{s_x \sqrt{\frac{1}{n}}} \\
   = \bar{y} \Big/ \frac{s_x}{\sqrt{n}} \\
   = \frac{\bar{y}}{SE_{\bar{y}}}

Commit message:

Fixes to mean_test_example

mean_test_example.rst, after:

############################################
A worked example of the general linear model
############################################

See: `introduction to the general linear model`_.

Here we go through the matrix formulation of the general linear model with the
simplest possible example |--| a t-test for the difference of the sample mean
from zero.

Let us say we have the hypothesis that men are more psychopathic than women.

We find 10 male-female couples, and we give them each a psychopathy
questionnaire.  We score the questionnaires, and then, for each couple, we
subtract the woman's score from the man's score, to get a difference score.

We have 10 difference scores:

.. nbplot::

    >>> #: Our standard imports
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> import numpy.linalg as npl
    >>> # Only show 4 decimals when printing arrays
    >>> np.set_printoptions(precision=4)

.. nbplot::

    >>> differences = np.array([ 1.5993, -0.13  ,  2.3806,  1.3761, -1.3595,
    ...                          1.0286,  0.8466,  1.6669, -0.8241,  0.4469])

Our hypothesis is that the females in the couple have a lower psychopathy
score. We therefore predict that, in the whole population of male-female
couples, the difference measure will, on average, be positive (men have higher
scores than women).

We teat this hypothesis by testing whether the sample mean is far enough from
zero to make it unlikely that the population mean is actually zero.

******************************
The standard error of the mean
******************************

One way to test this, is to compare the mean value, to the `standard error of
the mean
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_error#Standard_error_of_the_mean_2>`_.

The `standard error`_ of a statistic (such as a mean) is the standard
deviation of the sampling distribution of the statistic.  The sampling
distribution is the distribution of the statistic that we expect when taking a
very large number of samples of the statistic.  For example, the sampling
distribution of the mean, is the expected distribution of the sample means
generated by taking a very large number of samples.

As usual, define the *mean* of a vector of values $\vec{x}$ as:

.. math::

    \bar{x} = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^n x_i

Define the *unbiased estimate of the standard deviation* of $\vec{x}$ as:

.. math::

    s_x = \sqrt{\frac{1}{n-1} \sum_{i=1}^n (x_i - \bar{x})^2}

Notice the $\frac{1}{n-1}$.   We have previously used $n$ rather than $n-1$ as
the divisor for the *sample standard deviation*.  Using $n$, our *sample
standard deviation* is a biased estimate of the population standard deviation.
Using $n-1$ as the divisor gives an unbiased estimate for population standard
deviation.

The standard error of the mean is:

.. math::

    SE_{\bar{x}} = \frac{s_x}{\sqrt{n}}

where $n$ is the number of samples, 10 in our case.

A t statistic is given by a value divided by the *standard error* of that
value.  The t statistic for $\bar{x}$ is:

.. math::

    t = \frac{\bar{x}}{SE_{\bar{x}}}

In our case:

.. nbplot::

    >>> x = differences
    >>> n = len(x)
    >>> x_bar = np.mean(x)
    >>> x_bar
    0.70314...
    >>> unviased_var_x = 1. / (n - 1) * np.sum((x - x_bar) ** 2)
    >>> s_x = np.sqrt(unviased_var_x)
    >>> s_x
    1.17718...
    >>> SEM = s_x / np.sqrt(n)
    >>> SEM
    0.37225...
    >>> t = x_bar / SEM
    >>> t
    1.88884...

**************************************
Testing using the general linear model
**************************************

It is overkill for us to use the general linear model for this, but it does
show how the machinery works in the simplest case.

:math:`\newcommand{Xmat}{\boldsymbol X} \newcommand{\bvec}{\vec{\beta}}`
:math:`\newcommand{\yvec}{\vec{y}} \newcommand{\xvec}{\vec{x}} \newcommand{\evec}{\vec{\varepsilon}}`

The matrix expression of the general linear model is:

.. math::

   \yvec = \Xmat \bvec + \evec

:math:`\newcommand{Xmat}{\boldsymbol X} \newcommand{\bvec}{\vec{\beta}}`

Define our design matrix $\Xmat$ to have a single column of ones:

.. nbplot::

    >>> X = np.ones((n, 1))
    >>> X
    array([[ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.],
           [ 1.]])

:math:`\newcommand{\bhat}{\hat{\bvec}} \newcommand{\yhat}{\hat{\yvec}}`

$\bhat$ is The least squares estimate for $\bvec$, and is given by:

.. math::

    \bhat = (\Xmat^T \Xmat)^{-1} \Xmat^T \yvec

Because $\Xmat$ is just a column of ones, $\Xmat^T \yvec = \sum_i{y_i}$.

$\Xmat^T \Xmat = n$, so $(\Xmat^T \Xmat)^{-1} = \frac{1}{n}$.

Thus:

.. math::

    \bhat = (\Xmat^T \Xmat)^{-1} \Xmat^T \yvec \\
    = \frac{1}{n} \sum_i{y_i} \\
    = \bar{y}

The student's t statistic from the general linear model is:

.. math::

   t = \frac{c^T \hat\beta}{\sqrt{\hat{\sigma}^2 c^T (\Xmat^T \Xmat)^+ c}}

where $\hat{\sigma}^2$ is our estimate of variance in the residuals, $c$ is a
contrast vector to select some combination of the design columns, and
$(\Xmat^T \Xmat)^+$ is the *pseudoinverse* of $\Xmat^T \Xmat$.

In our case we have only one design column, so $c = [1]$ and we can omit it.
$\hat{\sigma}^2 = s_x^2$ for $s_x$ defined above.  $\Xmat^T \Xmat$ is
invertible, and we know the inverse already: $\frac{1}{n}$.  Therefore:

.. math::

   t = \frac{\bar{y}}{s_x \sqrt{\frac{1}{n}}} \\
   = \bar{y} \Big/ \frac{s_x}{\sqrt{n}} \\
   = \frac{\bar{y}}{SE_{\bar{y}}}
